Binomial Trees 
in Practice
As we have seen in Chapters 13, 15, and 16, the Black−Scholes−Merton model and its 
extensions can be used to value European call and put options on stocks, stock indices, 
currencies, and futures contracts. For American options we rely on binomial trees. In 
this chapter we cover, more completely than in Chapter 12, how binomial trees are 
used in practice. In particular, we explain how the binomial tree methodology can be 
used to value American options on a range of different underlying assets, including 
dividend-paying stocks, and how it can be used to calculate the Greek letters that were 
introduced in Chapter 17. The DerivaGem software that accompanies this book can be 
used to carry out the calculations described in the chapter and to display the binomial 
trees that are used.

18.1 THE BINOMIAL MODEL FOR A 
NON-DIVIDEND-PAYING STOCK
The binomial tree methodology for handling American-style options was proposed by 
Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein in 1979.1 Consider the evaluation of an option on a non
dividend-paying stock. We start by dividing the life of the option into a large number 
of small time intervals of length Δt. We assume that in each time interval the stock 
price moves from its initial value of S to one of two new values, Su and Sd. This model 
is illustrated in Figure 18.1. In general, u > 1 and d < 1. The movement from S to Su is, 
therefore, an “up” movement and the movement from S to Sd is a “down” movement. 
The probability of an up movement will be denoted by p. The probability of a down 
movement is 1 − p.

Risk-Neutral Valuation
The risk-neutral valuation principle, discussed in Chapters 12 and 13, states that any 
security dependent on a stock price can be valued on the assumption that the world is 
risk neutral. This means that, for the purposes of valuing an option (or any other 
derivative), we can assume the following:
1. The expected return from all traded securities is the risk-free interest rate.
2. Future cash flows can be valued by discounting their expected values at the 
risk-free interest rate.
We will make use of this result when using a binomial tree.

Determination of p, u, and d
We design the tree to represent the behavior of a stock price in a risk-neutral world. The 
parameters p, u, and d must give correct values for the mean and variance of the stock 
price return during a time interval Δt in this world. The expected return from a stock is 
the risk-free interest rate, r. Hence, the expected value of the stock price at the end of a 
time interval Δt is SerΔt
, where S is the stock price at the beginning of the time interval. 
To match the mean stock price return with the tree, we therefore need
or
The variance of a variable Q is defined as E(Q2
) − E(Q)
2
, where E denotes expected 
value. Defining R as the proportional change in the asset price in time Δt, there is a 
probability p that 1 + R is u and a probability 1 − p that 1 + R is d. It follows that the 
variance of 1 + R is pu2 + (1 − p)d2 − [pu + (1 − p)d]2. Because adding a constant to a 
variable makes no difference to its variance, the variance of 1 + R is the same as the 
variance of R. As explained in Section 13.1, this is s2Δt. Hence,
Equations (18.2) and (18.3) impose two conditions on p, u, and d. A third condition used 
by Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein is
When Dt is small, equations (18.2), (18.3), and this equation are satisfied by
where
The variable a is sometimes referred to as the growth factor. Equations (18.4) to (18.7) 
are the same as equations (12.11) to (12.14) in Chapter 12.

The Tree of Stock Prices
Figure 18.2 shows the complete tree of stock prices that is considered when the binomial 
model is used and there are four time steps. At time zero, the stock price, S0, is known. 
At time Δt, there are two possible stock prices, S0u and S0d; at time 2Δt, there are three 
possible stock prices, S0u2, S0, and S0d2; and so on. In general, at time i Δt, we consider 
i + 1 stock prices. These are
Note that the relationship u = 1/d is used in computing the stock price at each node of the 
tree in Figure 18.2. For example, the asset price when j = 2 and i = 3 is S0u2d = S0u. Note 
also that the tree recombines in the sense that an up movement followed by a down move
ment leads to the same stock price as a down movement followed by an up movement.

Working Backward through the Tree
Options are evaluated by starting at the end of the tree (time T) and working back
ward, a procedure known as backward induction. The value of the option is known at 
time T. For example, a put option is worth max(K − ST, 0) and a call option is worth 
max(ST − K, 0), where ST is the stock price at time T and K is the strike price. Because 
a risk-neutral world is assumed, the value at each node at time T − Δt can be calculated 
as the expected value at time T discounted at rate r for a time period Δt. Similarly, 
the value at each node at time T − 2Δt can be calculated as the expected value at time 
T − Δt discounted for a time period Δt at rate r, and so on. If the option is American, 
it is necessary to check at each node to see whether early exercise is preferable to 
holding the option for a further time period Δt. Eventually, by working back through 
all the nodes, we obtain the value of the option at time zero.

Illustration
We now illustrate the procedure with a five-step tree. Consider an American put option 
on a non-dividend-paying stock when the stock price is $50, the strike price is $50, the 
risk-free interest rate is 10% per annum, the life is five months, and the volatility is 40% 
per annum. With our usual notation, this means that S0 = 50, K = 50, r = 0.10, s = 0.40, 
and T = 0.4167. We divide the life of the option into five intervals of length one month 
for the purposes of constructing a binomial tree. Then Δt = 1/12 and, using equations 
(18.4) to (18.7),
Figure 18.3 shows the binomial tree (produced using DerivaGem). At each node there 
are two numbers. The top one shows the stock price at the node; the lower one shows 
the value of the option at the node. The probability of an up movement is always 
0.5073; the probability of a down movement is always 0.4927.
The stock price at the jth (j = 0, 1, . . ., i) node at time i Δt (i = 0, 1, . . ., 5) is calculated 
as –0j ij Sud . For example, the stock price at node A (i = 4, j = 1) (i.e., the second node up 
at the end of the fourth time step) is 50 × 1.1224 × 0.89093 = $39.69.
The option prices at the final nodes are calculated as max(K − ST, 0). For example, 
the option price at node G is 50.00 − 35.36 = 14.64. The option prices at the penultimate 
nodes are calculated from the option prices at the final nodes. First, we assume no 
exercise of the option at a node. This means that the option price is calculated as the 
present value of the expected option price one time step later. For example, at node E, 
the option price is calculated as
whereas at node A it is calculated as
We then check to see if early exercise is preferable to waiting. At node E, early exercise 
would give a value for the option of zero because both the stock price and strike 
price are $50. Clearly, it is best to wait. The correct value for the option at node E 
is, therefore, $2.66. At node A, it is a different story. If the option is exercised, it is 
worth $50.00 − $39.69, or $10.31. This is more than $9.90. If node A is reached, the 
option should, therefore, be exercised and the correct value for the option at node 
A is $10.31.
Option prices at earlier nodes are calculated in a similar way. Note that it is not 
always best to exercise an option early when it is in the money. Consider node B. If the 
option is exercised, it is worth $50.00 − $39.69, or $10.31. However, if it is not exercised, 
it is worth
The option should, therefore, not be exercised at this node, and the correct option value 
at the node is $10.36.
Working back through the tree, we find the value of the option at the initial node 
to be $4.49. This is our numerical estimate for the option’s current value. In practice, 
a smaller value of Δt, and many more nodes, would be used. DerivaGem shows that 
with 30, 50, and 100 time steps we get values for the option of 4.263, 4.272, and 4.278, 
respectively.

Expressing the Approach Algebraically
Suppose that the life of an American put option on a non-dividend-paying stock is 
divided into N subintervals of length Δt. We will refer to the jth node at time i Δt as 
the (i, j) node, where 0 ≤ i ≤ N and 0 ≤ j ≤ i. This means that the lowest node at time 
i Δt is (i, 0), the next lowest is (i, 1), and so on. Define fi,j as the value of the option 
at the (i, j) node. The stock price at the (i, j) node is S0ujdi − j. Because the value of an 
American put at its expiration date is max(K − ST, 0), We know that
There is a probability, p, of moving from the (i, j) node at time i Δt to the (i + 1, j + 1) node 
at time (i + 1)Δt, and a probability 1 − p of moving from the (i, j) node at time i Δt to the 
(i + 1, j) node at time (i + 1) Δt. Assuming no early exercise, risk-neutral valuation gives
for 0 ≤ i ≤ N − 1 and 0 ≤ j ≤ i. When early exercise is possible, this value for fi,j must be 
compared with the option’s intrinsic value, and we obtain
Note that, because the calculations start at time T and work backward, the value at time 
i Δt captures not only the effect of early exercise possibilities at time i Δt, but also the 
effect of early exercise at subsequent times.
In the limit as Δt tends to zero, an exact value for the American put is obtained. In 
practice, N = 30 usually gives reasonable results. Figure 18.4 shows the convergence of 
the option price in the example we have been considering. (This figure was calculated 
using the Application Builder functions provided with the DerivaGem software. See 
Sample Application A.)
If a call rather than a put is being valued, the value at the final node is max(ST − K, 0), 
so that
Also, when early exercise is possible, the expression for i j, f must reflect the payoff from 
a call rather than a put, so that

Estimating Delta and Other Greek Letters
It will be recalled that the delta, Δ, of an option is the rate of change of its price with 
respect to the underlying stock price. It can be calculated as
where ΔS is a small change in the stock price and Δ f is the corresponding small change 
in the option price. At time Δt, we have an estimate f1,1 for the option price when the 
stock price is S0u and an estimate f1,0 for the option price when the stock price is S0d. 
This means that, when ΔS = S0u − S0d, we have Δ f = f1,1 − f1,0. An estimate of Δ at time 
Δt is therefore
To determine gamma, Γ, we note that there are two estimates of Δ at time 2Δt. When 
the stock price is (S0u2 + S0)/2 (halfway between the second and third node at time 2Δt), 
delta is (f2,2 − f2,1)/(S0u2 − S0); when the stock price is (S0 + S0d2)/2 (halfway between the 
first and second node at time 2Δt), delta is (f2,1 − f2,0)/(S0 − S0d2). The difference between 
the two stock prices is h, where
Gamma is the change in delta divided by h, or
These procedures provide estimates of delta at time Δt and of gamma at time 2Δt. In 
practice, they are usually used as estimates of delta and gamma at time zero as well.2
A further hedge parameter that can be obtained directly from the tree is theta, Θ. 
This is the rate of change of the option price with time when all else is kept constant. 
The value of the option at time zero, when the stock price is S0, is f0,0 . The value of the 
option at time 2Δt, when the stock price is S0, is f2,1. An estimate of theta is therefore
Vega can be calculated by making a small change, Δs, in the volatility and constructing 
a new tree to obtain a new value of the option (the number of time steps should be kept 
the same). The estimate of vega is
where f and f *
 are the estimates of the option price from the original and the new tree, 
respectively. Rho can be calculated similarly.
As an illustration, consider the tree in Figure 18.3. In this case, f1,0 = 6.96 and 
f1,1 = 2.16. Equation (18.8) gives an estimate of delta of
From equation (18.9), an estimate of the gamma of the option can be obtained from the 
values at nodes B, C, and F as
From equation (18.10), an estimate of the theta of the option can be obtained from the 
values at nodes D and C as
or −0.012 per calendar day. These are, of course, only rough estimates. They become 
progressively better as the number of time steps on the tree is increased. Using 50 time 
steps, DerivaGem provides estimates of −0.414, 0.033, and −0.0117 for delta, gamma, 
and theta, respectively.

18.2 USING THE BINOMIAL TREE FOR OPTIONS ON 
INDICES, CURRENCIES, AND FUTURES CONTRACTS
As shown in Section 12.10, the binomial tree approach to valuing options on non
dividend-paying stocks can easily be adapted to valuing American calls and puts on a 
stock paying a continuous dividend yield at rate q.
Because the dividends provide a return of q, the stock price itself must, on average, 
in a risk-neutral world provide a return of r − q. Hence, equation (18.1) becomes
so that
The parameters p, u, and d must satisfy this equation and equation (18.3). Equations 
(18.4), (18.5), and (18.6) are still correct but with
The binomial tree numerical procedure can therefore be used exactly as before with 
this new value of a.
We showed in Chapters 15 and 16 that stock indices, currencies, and futures contracts 
can for the purposes of option evaluation be considered as stocks paying continuous 
dividend yields. In the case of a stock index, the relevant dividend yield is the dividend 
yield on the stock portfolio underlying the index; in the case of a currency, it is the 
foreign risk-free interest rate; in the case of a futures contract, it is the domestic risk-free 
interest rate. Examples 18.1 and 18.2 illustrate this.

18.3 THE BINOMIAL MODEL FOR A 
DIVIDEND-PAYING STOCK
We now move on to the more tricky issue of how the binomial model can be used for 
a stock paying discrete dividends. As in Chapter 13, the word “dividend” will for the 
purposes of our discussion be used to refer to the reduction in the stock price on the 
ex-dividend date as a result of the dividend.

Known Dividend Yield
For long-life stock options, it is sometimes assumed for convenience that there is a 
known continuous dividend yield of q on the stock. The options can then be valued in 
the same way as options on a stock index. For more accuracy, known dividend yields 
can be assumed to be paid discretely. Suppose first that a single dividend will be paid 
at a certain time and that it will be a proportion d of the stock price at that time. The 
parameters u, d, and p can be calculated as though no dividends are expected. The tree 
takes the form shown in Figure 18.5 and can be analyzed in a way that is analogous to 
that just described. If the time i Δt is prior to the stock going ex-dividend, the nodes on 
the tree correspond to stock prices
If the time i Δt is after the stock goes ex-dividend, the nodes correspond to stock prices
Several known dividends during the life of an option can be dealt with similarly. If di
is the total dividend yield associated with all ex-dividend dates between time zero and 
time i Δt, the nodes at time i Δt correspond to stock prices

Known Dollar Dividend
In some situations, particularly when the life of the option is short, it is more realistic to 
assume that the dollar amount of the dividend rather than the dividend yield is known 
in advance. If the volatility of the stock, s, is assumed constant, the tree takes the form 
shown in Figure 18.6. It does not recombine, which means that the number of nodes 
that have to be evaluated is liable to become very large. Suppose that there is only one 
dividend, that the ex-dividend date, t, is between kΔt and (k + 1)Δt, and that the dollar 
amount of the dividend is D. When i ≤ k, the nodes on the tree at time i Δt correspond 
to stock prices
as before. When i = k + 1, the nodes on the tree correspond to stock prices
When i = k + 2, the nodes on the tree correspond to stock prices
for j = 0, 1, 2, . . ., i − 1, so that there are 2i rather than i + 1 nodes. At time (k + m)Δt, there 
are m(k + 2) rather than k + m + 1 nodes. The number of nodes expands even faster 
when there are several ex-dividend dates during the option’s life.
The node-proliferation problem can be solved by assuming, as in the analysis of 
European options in Chapter 13, that the stock price has two components: a part that 
is uncertain and a part that is the present value of all future dividends during the life 
of the option. Suppose that there is only one ex-dividend date, t, during the life of the 
option and that kΔt ≤ t ≤ (k + 1)Δt. The value S* of the uncertain component (i.e., the 
component not used to pay dividends) at time i Δt is given by
and
where D is the dividend. Define s* as the volatility of S* and assume that s* is constant.3
The parameters p, u, and d can be calculated from equations (18.4), (18.5), (18.6), and 
(18.7) with s replaced by s*, and a tree can be constructed in the usual way to model 
S*. By adding to the stock price at each node, the present value of future dividends 
(if any), the tree can be converted into another tree that models S. Suppose that * S0 is the 
value of S* at time zero. At time i Δt, the nodes on this tree correspond to the stock prices
when i Δt < t and
when i Δt > t. This approach, which has the advantage of being consistent with the 
approach for European options in Section 13.10, succeeds in achieving a situation where 
the tree recombines so that there are i + 1 nodes at time i Δt. It can be generalized in a 
straightforward way to deal with the situation where there are several dividends. The 
approach is illustrated in Example 18.3. As indicated earlier, for long-life options a 
known dividend yield rather than a known dollar dividend is often assumed.

18.4 EXTENSIONS OF THE BASIC TREE APPROACH
We now explain two ways in which the binomial tree approach can be extended.

Time-Dependent Interest Rates and Volatilities
Up to now we have been assuming that interest rates are constant. When the term struc
ture is steeply upward or downward sloping and American options are being valued, 
this may not be a satisfactory assumption. It is more appropriate to assume that the 
interest rate for a period of length Δt in the future equals the current forward interest 
rate for that period. We can accommodate this assumption by setting
for nodes at time t where f(t) is the forward rate between times t and t + Δt. This does not 
change the geometry of the tree because u and d do not depend on a. The probabilities 
on the branches emanating from nodes at time t are as before:4
The rest of the way in which we use the tree is the same as before, except that when 
discounting from time t + Δt to time t we use f(t). A similar modification of the basic 
tree can be used to value index options, foreign exchange options, and futures options. 
In these applications the dividend yield on an index or a foreign risk-free rate can be 
made a function of time by following a similar approach to that just described.
Making the volatility s a function of time in a binomial tree is more difficult. Suppose 
s (t) is the volatility used to price an option with a life of t. One approach is to make the 
length of each time step inversely proportional to the average variance rate during the 
time step. The values of u and d are then the same everywhere and the tree recombines. 
Define the V = s (T)2T, where T is the life of the tree and define ti as the end of the 
ith time step. For N time steps, we choose ti to satisfy s (ti)2ti = iV/N and set V N/ u e =
with d = 1/u. The parameter p is defined as for a constant volatility. This procedure can 
be combined with the procedure just mentioned for dealing with non-constant interest 
rates, so that both interest rates and volatilities are time-dependent.

The Control Variate Technique
A technique known as the control variate technique can be used for the evaluation 
of an American option.5
 This involves using the same tree to calculate both the value 
of the American option, fA, and the value of the corresponding European option, fE. 
The Black−Scholes−Merton price of the European option, fBSM, is also calculated. The 
error given by the tree in the pricing of the European option, fBSM − fE, is assumed 
equal to that given by the tree in the pricing of the American option. This gives the 
estimate of the price of the American option to be
To illustrate this approach, Figure 18.7 values the option in Figure 18.3 on the assump
tion that it is European. The price obtained, fE, is $4.32. From the Black−Scholes−
Merton formula, the true European price of the option, fBSM, is $4.08. The estimate 
of the American price, fA, in Figure 18.3 is $4.49. The control variate estimate of the 
American price is therefore
A good estimate of the American price, calculated using 100 steps, is 4.278. The 
control variate approach does, therefore, produce a considerable improvement over the 
basic tree estimate of 4.49 in this case. In effect, it uses the tree to calculate the difference 
between the European and the American price rather than the American price itself.

18.5 ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE FOR 
CONSTRUCTING TREES
The Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein approach is not the only way of building a binomial tree. 
Instead of imposing the assumption u = 1/d on equations (18.2) and (18.3), we can set 
p = 0.5. A solution to the equations for small Δt is then
When the stock provides a continuous dividend yield at rate q, the variable r becomes 
r − q in these formulas. This allows trees with p = 0.5 to be built for options on indices, 
foreign exchange, and futures. The procedure is illustrated in Example 18.4.
This alternative tree-building procedure has the advantage over the Cox, Ross, and 
Rubinstein approach that the probabilities are always 0.5 regardless of the value of s or 
the number of time steps.6
 A small disadvantage is that the calculation of delta, gamma, 
and theta from the tree is not quite as accurate because the values of the underlying 
asset at times Δt and 2Δt are no longer centered at S0.

18.6 MONTE CARLO SIMULATION
Binomial trees can be used in conjunction with a procedure known as Monte Carlo 
simulation for valuing derivatives. Once the tree has been constructed, we randomly 
sample paths through it. Instead of working backward from the end of the tree to the 
beginning, we work forward through the tree. The basic procedure is as follows. At the 
first node we sample a random number between 0 and 1. If the number lies between 0 
and p, we take the upper branch; if it lies between p and 1, we take the lower branch. 
We repeat this procedure at the node that is then reached and at all subsequent nodes 
that are reached until we get to the end of the tree. We then calculate the payoff on the 
option for the particular path sampled. This completes the first trial. We carry out many 
more trials by repeating the whole procedure. Our estimate of the value of the option 
is the arithmetic average of the payoffs from all the trials discounted at the risk-free 
interest rate. Example 18.5 provides an illustration.
Monte Carlo simulation, as just described, cannot easily be used for American 
options, because we have no way of knowing whether early exercise is optimal when a 
certain node is reached. It can be used to value European options so that a check is pro
vided on the pricing formulas for these options. It can also be used to price some of the 
exotic options we will discuss in Chapter 22 (e.g. Asian options and lookback options).

SUMMARY
This chapter has described how options can be valued using the binomial tree approach. 
This approach involves dividing the life of the option into a number of small intervals 
of length Δt and assuming that an asset price at the beginning of an interval can lead to 
only one of two alternative asset prices at the end of the interval. One of these alterna
tive asset prices involves an up movement; the other involves a down movement.
The sizes of the up movements and down movements, and their associated probabil
ities, are chosen so that the change in the asset price has the correct mean and standard 
deviation for a risk-neutral world. Option prices are calculated by starting at the end 
of the tree and working backward. At the end of the tree, the price of an option is its 
intrinsic value. At earlier nodes on the tree, the value of an option, if it is American, must 
be calculated as the greater of
1. The value it has if exercised immediately
2. The value it has if held for a further period of time of length Δt.
If it is exercised at a node, the value of the option is its intrinsic value. If it is held for 
a further period of length Δt, the value of the option is its expected value at the end of 
the time period Δt discounted at the risk-free rate.
Delta, gamma, and theta can be estimated directly from the values of the option at 
the various nodes of the tree. Vega can be estimated by making a small change to the 
volatility and recomputing the value of the option using a similar tree. Rho can similarly 
be estimated by making a small change to the interest rate and recomputing the tree.
The binomial tree approach can handle options on stocks paying continuous dividend 
yields. Because stock indices, currencies, and most futures contracts can be regarded as 
analogous to stocks paying continuous yields, binomial trees can handle options on 
these assets as well.
When the binomial tree approach is used to value options on a stock paying known 
dollar dividends, it is convenient to use the tree to model the stock price less the pres
ent value of all future dividends during the life of the option. This keeps the number 
of nodes on the tree from becoming unmanageable and is consistent with the way 
European options on dividend-paying stocks are valued.
The computational efficiency of the binomial model can be improved by using the 
control variate technique. This involves valuing both the American option that is of 
interest and the corresponding European option using the same tree. The error in the 
price of the European option is used as an estimate of the error in the price of the 
American option.

FURTHER READING
Boyle, P. P. “Options: A Monte Carlo Approach,” Journal of Financial Economics, 4 (1977): 323−28.
Boyle, P. P., M. Broadie, and P. Glasserman. “Monte Carlo Methods for Security Pricing,” Journal 
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21 (1997): 1267−1322.
Cox, J. C., S. A. Ross, and M. Rubinstein. “Option Pricing: A Simplified Approach,” Journal of 
Financial Economics, 7 (October 1979): 229−64.
Figlewski, S., and B. Gao. “The Adaptive Mesh Model: A New Approach to Efficient Option 
Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 53 (1999), 313−51.
Hull, J. C., and A. White. “The Use of the Control Variate Technique in Option Pricing,” Journal 
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 23 (September 1988): 237−51.
Longstaff, F. A. and E. S. Schwartz. “Valuing American Options by Simulation: A Least Squares 
Approach,” Review of Financial Studies, 14, 1 (2001): 113−47.
Rendleman, R., and B. Bartter. “Two State Option Pricing,” Journal of Finance, 34 (1979): 
1092−1110.

Quiz (Answers at End of Book)
18.1. Which of the following can be estimated for an American option by constructing a single 
binomial tree: delta, gamma, vega, theta, rho?
18.2. The probability for an up-movement on a binomial tree is (a − d)/(u − d). Explain how 
the growth factor a is calculated for (a) a non-dividend-paying stock, (b) a stock index, 
(c) a foreign currency, and (d) a futures contract.
